---
layout: page
title:  "The Excalibur"
location: main-area
category: "(Once Upon A Time I Played The) Guitar"
permalink: /excalibur/
---

If you get to steal only one of my guitars, steal the Excalibur. The
catch? I will have to kill you...

The Excalibur is my primary instrument, and considering the things I
own it is easily my most beloved possession, even though I own other
pieces of gear with higher street value. I modified this guitar
extensively and now it rivals – and in some respects even surpasses –
the best guitars I’ve ever had the pleasure to try (but not to own).

[![](/images/excalibur/01.jpg)](/images/excalibur/01-big.jpg)  
*Excalibur: modifications*

The Excalibur started its life in 2000 as a regular Epiphone Les Paul
Standard manufactured in Korea. I received it for my 18th birthday
from my parents! (Yes, this happened many, many years ago.) And so our
relationship began...

I quickly fell in love with this instrument, however, as I got more
serious with playing the guitar I became tired of some annoying
defects. My primary aim with the modifications was fixing these, while
also implementing enhancements which would elevate the guitar’s
quality to the next level (to be at least on par with the real Gibson
Les Paul).

One of my main hurdles was that the instrument would always detune,
especially with my style of aggressive, messy blues-phrasing with lots
of bends. So the first step was to change the crappy Epiphone tuners
to a set of Grover DeLuxe tuners. The selection algorithm: 1) go to
local music parts shop with guitar in hand; 2) shift through all
available stocks of tuner sets until a set with appropriate sizing is
found, one that, once the old tuners were removed, would fit nicely in
their place. Much to my horror, when I later proceeded to actually
remove the Epiphone tuners from the headstock, I found that these
tuners had relatively thin axes and the holes in the headstock wood
were matching in diameter. However, the Grover pieces – while sporting
the same exterior sizes – had considerably thicker axes and would not
fit into the smaller holes. I had no other choice than to drill the
mahogany with the only tool I had at hand, a low-budget household
power drill.

[![](/images/excalibur/02.jpg)](/images/excalibur/02-big.jpg)  
*PU switch is original, labelling too...*

The detuning problem was now solved – the guitar would withstand
considerable abuse with little need for repeated tuning. However, the
real fun would start when I began to use my guitar on loud band
rehearsals: plugged into a Marshall half-stack on mid volume, standing
two meters from the stack an uncontrollable feedback sound would
ensue. Even after muting the strings with both hands. Subsequent
studies showed that I experienced the effects of [microphonics]
first-hand. The Epiphone pickups proved to be defective: insufficient
wax potting resulted in microphonic sensitivity causing intolerable,
high-pitched feedback.

So the pickups had to be changed. After some research I decided that I
would bite the bullet and in the same run, also try extending the
sonic versatility of the guitar. I have read about guitar electronics
before and contemplated some experiments with coil-splitting
circuits. Now was the perfect moment – I only needed to sort out a few
things: 1) what pickups to use (and where to buy them); 2) what kind
of pots do I need (and where to buy them); 3) how to actually build
them together. Since I’d always admired the stunning array of tones
from Jimmy Page’s guitar (mostly heard on studio albums he did with
Led Zeppelin), I naturally wanted to emulate some of that goodness. I
knew Page had also had his guitar modified and also used push-pull
pots to trigger some non-conventional pickup wirings (coil splitting
et al), so why not go down his route?

[![](/images/excalibur/03.jpg)](/images/excalibur/03-big.jpg)  
*Bridge PU & push-pull pots*

Researching the Internet for the state of the art of the famous and
widely used Jimmy Page guitar wiring, I finally settled on using the
so-called *Les Paul Twenty Dual master* design, published under [this
link]<sup>[1](#f1)</sup>. This is not the exact version JP used in his
guitar, but a slightly changed (and enhanced) reincarnation of it. I
decided on implementing this one based on the clarity and
understability of the wiring diagrams and the high number of possible
combinations (a surprisingly large number of which actually proved to
be usable). Now I knew I needed four identical (500 kΩ audio taper)
push-pull pots with dual circuit switches. Thankfully I was able to
locate suitable parts manufactured by Göldo in a local shop.

Pickups! Always a matter of personal taste, with a multitude of
options... With limited funds, I decided to play it safe in the neck
position and purchase the neck pickup that is standard in Gibson Les
Pauls: the Gibson 490R. Just another visit to another local shop. Last
leftover piece in stock. Piece of cake.

With the bridge pickup I decided to be more adventurous. I wanted
something more exotic, and sought to diverge from simply upgrading to
the quality of a modern Gibson Les Paul. Again, I looked at JP’s 1959
Les Paul (his #2) and decided that I liked the concept of having a
naked (coverless) bridge pickup... I only needed the sound to match
that mental image. Now came another round of visiting music equipment
stores... until I found, much to my pleasure, the Seymour Duncan 59
Model Humbucker (SH1B) claiming to be an exact replica of the 1959 PAF
humbucker. Just what I was looking for. The catch: only available in
two-wire version (and in fact, this time again it was the only piece
left in stock). I decided to go for it and later extend the wiring to
four-wire so I can have the coil splitting I need with the JP-style
wiring. Thankfully, after reading up on the subject, I decided it was
a reasonably safe operation to do.

[![](/images/excalibur/04.jpg)](/images/excalibur/04-big.jpg)  
*Headstock*

Now came a happy period of rocking out... the sound I now got from the
guitar was downright gorgeous (I had to realize how poor the original
Epiphone pickups were, even with all the microphonics discounted), the
feedback issues were gone and I could play for extended periods
without always tuning. However, with countless hours of abuse, the
frets and the tune-o-matic bridge started showing signs of wear. I had
no illusions regarding the quality of the latter. I took the guitar to
a local musical instrument repair shop for fret grinding and
installment of a new tune-o-matic manufactured by Schaller. (Next time
around, frets will also need replacement.) Much to my delight, they
also endeavoured to trim the Gibson bone nut material I picked up on
one of my earlier scavenger hunts, and replaced the original plastic
nut, exactly replicating its dimensions. To top it all off, they also
had stainless screws to replace the original screws fixing the plastic
pickup rings to the guitar body. Some of those were at this point
rusty beyond recognition... now everything became shiny clean.

At some point I removed the original cream-coloured pickguard; I just
prefer how it looks this way. I didn’t need it anyway: I’m picking the
strings, not the wood, and I tend to rest my pinky on the edge of the
bridge pickup’s plastic ring... I also installed Schaller strap-locks
to be able to quickly put my guitar strap on (and take it off
easily). I now have these strap-locks installed on all my guitars so
the same strap can be used for all. Very convenient, I can only
recommend it.

It was in this state that I started recording [Decline] in 2011. I've
been extremely happy with the guitar; I could always get the tone I
wanted out of this instrument. In fact no other electric guitar has
been recorded on the album. I also love the way it looks (the Epiphone
logo on the headstock - a pearl inlay - is especially beautiful).  All
in all, I was lucky that the body itself (the wood material, the
woodwork and the paint job) were of reasonable quality. Fret placings,
while not 100% precision, are also not that bad (in higher positions,
some notes are a bit off, mostly on E6 and A, but I can live with
that).

For the sake of reference, here’s how the push-pull pots function:

- The normal state, when all pots are pushed in: everything works as
  you would expect on an ordinary Les Paul.

- Pulling out the bridge tone pot switches the bridge pickup from
  serial humbucker to parallel, or, in case the neck tone pot is also
  pulled, to single coil.

- Pulling out the neck tone pot switches the neck pickup to single
  coil, and in case the bridge tone pot is also pulled, it also
  switches the bridge pickup to single coil.

- Pulling out the bridge volume pot puts both pickups in serial mode
  and bypasses the selector switch. Thus both pickups will be in
  series, regardless of the selector switch position. In this position
  the bridge volume and tone control work regularly as master
  controls, while the neck tone control works like a treble booster,
  brightening up and broadening the sound in this so-called
  broadbucker configuration.

- Pulling out the neck volume pot puts the neck pickup out of
  phase. The effect is audible when both pickups are selected, that is
  in serial mode or, when the guitar is in parallel mode, with the
  pickup selector in the middle position. Moreover, when the neck
  pickup is in single coil mode, this switch selects which coil will
  be on (pushed in: adjustable coil; pulled out: stud coil).

<br>

[![](/images/excalibur/05.jpg)](/images/excalibur/05-big.jpg)
[![](/images/excalibur/06.jpg)](/images/excalibur/06-big.jpg)
[![](/images/excalibur/07.jpg)](/images/excalibur/07-big.jpg)

---

<b id="f1">1</b> Locally hosted copy of the images [here][1] and
[here][2], in case that forum thread ever disappears.

[microphonics]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Microphonics
[this link]: http://music-electronics-forum.com/t1079/#post12369
[Decline]: /decline/
[1]: /images/excalibur/LesPaul-TwentyDual-master.jpg
[2]: /images/excalibur/LesPaul-TwentyDual-mix.jpg
